Ancient Faith Radio presents Homilies from All Saints, taken from the weekly sermons by Father Patrick Henry Reardon, priest at All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago, and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
Here's Father Pat.
The name of the Father, but the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, amen.
This talk this morning, my brothers and sisters, on three subjects.
the gospel of Mark, the apostles, and the sacraments.
All during Lent, except the first Sunday, the gospel reading is from that according to Mark.
The church, the very intentional
in choosing Mark as the Gospel to be read as we prepare to celebrate the annual memory of the death of our Lord.
The Gospel of Mark was written sometime toward the end of the year 64
through the year 65.
And the occasion was the first official persecution of the Christians that broke out under Nero in the aftermath of the fire that began in Rome on July 15th of the year 64.
The events surrounding that fire and his aftermath are recorded in two pagan historians
in the annals of Tacitus and in Suetonius' lives of the Caesars in the section on Nero.
The rumor was, and Suetonius accepts it, that Nero himself had had the fire started.
It started part of his urban renewal program.
And Cecil B. DeMille seems to have picked that up in Covatis.
You have no idea what I'm talking about.
You're young people.
You know who Cecil Miedemille is to me?
A bloody persecution of the Christians ensued.
And it's described in detail by these two historians, these two pagan historians, tell what Nero and his men did to the Christians living at Rome.
after they were blamed for the setting of the fire.
It was in that context that the Gospel of Mark was written.
For that we have the universal testimony that includes people like Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria,
the anti-Marcian prologue, the Miratorian fragment, and other documents of the second century.
Mark wrote his gospel for a church suffering persecution.
And that's why the cross dominates the gospel of Mark.
That's why already in chapter two of the Gospel of Mark, already that early, Jesus is accused of blasphemy, which will be the accusation made against him at his trial.
That's why already in chapter three, verse five, there is a plot to kill Jesus.
All through the Gospel of Mark, the cross casts its shadow.
In the second half of that Gospel, Mark has structured his material around three prophecies of the Passion, one in Chapter 8, one in Chapter 9, third in Chapter 10.
That was today's Gospel, the final prophecy of the Passion in Chapter 10.
At the end of Chapter 10, which we'll be reading during the course of this week,
At the end of chapter 10, Jesus heals the blind man.
And then the following Sunday, the next day, he enters Jerusalem to suffer and die.
That's how the gospel of Mark is structured.
So today's gospel reading is the third prophecy of the Passion.
That brings us to the second point.
the apostles.
How do the apostles today respond to the word of the cross?
Pretty much the way we do, we would rather not hear it.
I don't know about you, but if I had my brothers, I'd rather have nothing to do with the crucifixion.
The crucifixion tells me who I am, what I'm made of, but also tells me what I'm worth, and all of that's essential to the message of the cross.
Now the apostles were hearing the message of the cross for the first time.
In those three prophecies of the Passion in the Gospel of Mark, each time Jesus says, I must go to Jerusalem,
who suffer and die, each time in the very next verse, the apostles give a completely negative and irresponsible answer.
In chapter 8, the first prophecy of the Passion, the very next verse Simon Peter takes Jesus aside and says, no, we can't have this.
We can't have you.
suffering and dying.
Peter becomes an enemy of the cross.
Now this is the man whose name symbolizes the rock on which the church is built.
He says no.
And why?
Because Peter is a worldly man.
He's not a millionaire.
He's not worldly in that sense.
He's a worldly man.
He sees things the way the world does.
But see, the love of the world of my brothers and sisters is inimical to Christ because the world is that over which it stands over against God is the enemy of God.
And he who loves the world cannot be the friend of God.
I've seen people over the years finally come to that conclusion.
I cannot love the world and God.
I have since becoming pastor at this parish received letters
from kids raised in this parish who told me that now that they are out of high school, they don't want to worship in a Christian church anymore because they don't believe.
They at least understand the terms.
They decided to be honest and not stick around.
I actually have those letters.
For former members of this pair, it's like, I don't believe anymore, and I want nothing to do with all Saints Church.
I'm not coming back anymore.
I've received such letters.
Those letters have at least this merit that they see that it's one way or the other.
That's been a theme for several sermons now.
One we, I think, have preached on Faust and St. Paul.
You see, those are honest letters.
The apostles want to have it both ways.
They want to belong to Christ, but that message of the cross, if you sort of ditch that and get rid of that, is what I call, I think, cafeteria orthodoxy.
We like this, but we don't like that.
We'll take this, but the other thing is this is not good.
The apostles wanted that way.
In chapter nine of the Gospel of Mark,
If Jesus gives the second prophecy of the Passion in the very next verse, what are the apostles talking about?
The very next verse.
They're discussing which of them is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
That's their response to the cross.
Which of them is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
Today, if Jesus gives the third prophecy of the Passion, what's the response of James and John?
Very next verse.
Lord, we have something to ask of you.
When you come in your glory, we would like to be sitting on your right and left hand.
Self-interest, surely worldly.
What's in it for me?
You see, the spirit of the world can be brought into the church itself, wanting to be a Christian because of what's in it for me.
Now, James,
in John and Peter are the three apostles in whom the trauma of the cross has worked out in the gospel of Mark.
They are the three that the Lord strengthens by taking them on the mountain of transfiguration in chapter nine of his gospel.
Those are the three Jesus takes up for the transfiguration.
They have to see it because those are the three that are going to see him in his dereliction
in the agony of the garden.
So these three apostles in some way stands for us all.
Jesus says to James and John today, you don't know what you're asking for.
To be on my right hand and on my left when I come in my kingdom.
Do you really want that?
Look in the gospel of Mark.
who is on his right hand and on his left when he comes into his kingdom.
Two thieves were crucified with him.
Do you really want that?
He says to them, can you drink the cup of which I have to drink?
That's the cup of which he says in the agony of the garden, remove this cup from me.
Can you be baptized with the baptism which I am baptized?
That's the baptism to which reference is made in the Gospel of Luke where Jesus says, I have a baptism with which to be baptized and how I am strengthened, straightened, until it is fulfilled.
The apostles finally have to face the cross.
There's no Jesus without the cross.
There's no interpretation of Jesus which will somehow wash the message of the cross from insignificance.
There are those who believe that Jesus is a religious teacher.
He tells us all to love one another.
But that's not the way he loves us.
He loves us not with love, but with the death
upon the cross.
I live in the faith of the Son of God," says Paul in Galatians 2.
I live in the faith of the Son of God who loved me and gave himself up for me.
Now, the church picks this gospel for today because we are just now two weeks away from baptism.
the church is always, almost from the beginning, not exactly from the beginning, but certainly by the late second century, has picked Pascha, Easter as a time of baptism.
So that question is being addressed to the Christians at Rome who are preparing for baptism in the First Holy Communion.
That question is also put
because the Catechumans at All Saints Church are preparing for baptism in the Holy Communion.
That question two weeks before it happens is being placed this morning to Mark and to Grace.
There is little Aiden here, little Aiden Spencer.
That question is being addressed to them.
Can you be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?
Can you drink the cup, the chalice that I am to drink?
See, baptism is not a nice way of naming babies.
You don't become a Greek by being baptized.
in spite of the movie to that effect.
Somebody's baptized agreed.
To baptize into Christ and use baptism for any other purpose is completely to miss it.
In fact, it's far better not to get baptized, to be baptized to the wrong reason.
Far better not to be baptized.
Because the baptism is a commitment to a certain way of life.
Now all of us, except for Mark,
and grace, and aid in the body except of the baptism.
But the cup itself is something we approach every Sunday in general.
The same question is put to us.
When we come to drink his blood in that chalice, the same question is put to our conscience.
Can you drink the cup of which I drink?
This is the cup of salvation.
And how is salvation attained?
By the outpouring of the blood of Christ.
That very expression, cup of salvation, comes from the Psalms.
It comes from one of the Psalms of the Hallel.
I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord.
The Hallel is the last part
of the Seder service.
The gospel of Mark says that at the end of the Last Supper, the apostles and Jesus sang a hymn.
And they went out to the garden.
That hymn was the Hallel.
So Jesus stood there with his apostles at the Last Supper and sang that verse, I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord.
And then they go out to the garden.
And Jesus faces that cup.
If it is possible, take it away from me.
But not my will, but I be done.
Now when we receive the blood of Christ, my brothers and sisters, the same question is addressed to us.
The same question that was addressed to the people of Constantinople
both Greeks and Latins, both Arabs and Frenchmen, all those Christians who were gathered in Constantinople for the last divine liturgy was celebrated 500 years ago in Hagia Sophia.
And they all came forward east and west together and received Holy Communion.
and then went out to their death at the hand of the Turk.
This is a quaint question that's been addressed to Armenians and Georgians, Arabs, and Greeks who have had to face Islam.
The same question addressed to Russians and Romanians
Serbs, Bulgarians, and Albanians tried to face the Bolsheviks.
This is the same question addressed to all of us.
By whose standard are you going to live?
Will it be the standard of the world or will it be the standard of the cross?
Now, let's be very honest about this.
If you think you have some other way of doing this, we're having to say pursue it.
We come to Christ, however, because we believe that there's no place else to go.
And only in Him do we have eternal life.
And for the sake of Christ, we think we commit ourselves to the cross as a way of life, as a standard by which we assess every problem in our lives, as the guiding star by which we direct the course of our lives, and as the bulwark by which we strengthen our lives.
This is the cross to which we commit ourselves.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.
Homilies from All Saints with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of Ancient Faith Radio.